---
layout: post
title: I created some simple helper functions for pacman - Pacext
categories: blog
---

I wrote a script that wraps some more complicated features of `pacman`. You can get it from the AUR if you're on Arch
at [aur/pacext-git](https://aur.archlinux.org/packages/pacext-git/) or manually on
[GitHub](https://github.com/CRISPYricePC/pacext)

## Motivation

Pacman is ArchLinux's excellent package manager. Its main philosophies are to provide an open interface to your
packages that can be utilised in other programs to do more complicated things. Because of this, it's feature set can be
a little daunting when you first look into it. For example, say you wanted to find the program that provides a binary,
say `grep`. How would you do it?

In the Enterprise Linux world, `dnf` provides a very intuitive subcommand, `provides`. You just type:

```sh
$ dnf provides grep
```

and `dnf` will spit the package *plus* anywhere else that you could get the package from:

```sh
$ dnf provides grep
grep-2.20-3.el8.x86_64 : Pattern matching utilities
Repo        : base
grep-2.20-3.el8.x86_64 : Pattern matching utilities
Repo        : @anaconda
```

Now lets say you wanted to do this for ArchLinux's `pacman`. What subcommand would you use? Well, `pacman` defines its
subcommands like so:

1. A hyphen `-`
2. A capital letter, denoting an "operation"
3. Zero or many lowercase letters, denoting options to apply to that operation

In this case, the correct options are capital "Q" for the Query operation, lowercase "o" for querying the owner of the
file. So in full:

```sh
$ pacman -Qo grep
/usr/bin/grep is owned by grep 3.7-1
```

Okay, that's not too terrible. But what if you wanted to list the packages dependencies? What if you also needed those
dependencies' descriptions? What if you needed a list of packages that *depended on* the given package, *plus* their
descriptions. Most modern package managers provide a vast amount of options to allow for this, but Arch tries not to
repeat itself with more functions that aren't strictly necessary, since you can get all this through the highly
programmable pre-existing interface.

That being said, it's always nice to have these functions, which is why I've written them.

## Example usages

So what are some examples of how `pacext` could be used. Well we can take the two examples from before:

### Listing dependencies and their descriptions

`pacext` lets us do this with either the `--whatdepends` flag or `-d` for short:

```sh
$ pacext -d grep
glibc 2.33-5
    GNU C Library
pcre 8.45-1
    A library that implements Perl 5-style regular expressions
```

As you can see, we get the descriptions and versions of the given packages.

### Listing what packages depend on this package + their descriptions

Similarly, we can do this with `--whatrequires` or `-r`:

```sh
$ pacext -r grep
base 2-2
    Minimal package set to define a basic Arch Linux installation
git 2.34.1-1
    the fast distributed version control system
mkinitcpio 31-2
    Modular initramfs image creation utility
```

## Other features

The design of this tool makes it easy to add other features because of its shell script nature. You're welcome to
help with a [pull request](https://github.com/CRISPYricePC/pacext/pulls) if you know how to code and use ArchLinux.
