---
layout: post
title: "Learning Rust by building a C++ templater: cppt"
categories: blog
---

One thing that's frequently frustrated me when developing C++ in lightweight editors like Neovim or VSCode, is that every time I want to create a new class or script file, or just plain initialise a new project, I need to create a ton of boilerplate. It would be nice if there was a command-line tool that let you create these files quickly and easily.

So, introducing [`cppt`](https://github.com/crispyricepc/cppt), a C++ templater written in... not C++.

## Why Rust?

Why not?! Okay I should probably explain why I didn't want to just use C++ to write a C++ oriented tool, and it's mainly that I wanted to try create a completed command-line application in a language that is becoming increasingly popular, and has good 3rd-party dependency management.

It also means I can see what areas C++ lacks in compared to Rust, and see whether my tool can remedy some of those.

## Templating Libraries?

Considering a lot of this project will be creating files from templates, there's the possibility that I should use a library that can create files from templates. I scoured for one of these that's written for Rust, but found that this area was distinctly lacking. Upon further thinking, I realised that this was probably because Rust doesn't *need* anything that achieves this; the `format!` macro acts much like `printf` or Python's fstrings, and it means I don't have to load any files from disk (or use any resource management system), keeping the whole tool fast.

## Following a project's code style (and my lazy approach to formatting)

I decided to go with a test driven development process for this project, the advantages of which have been covered to death and are, quite frankly, quite boring. But it did highlight an issue that I would come across inevitably, which was how to produce an output that not only matches the code style of the current project, but can also be compared easily to example files. For example, a difference in a newline or whitespace might not change the syntax of a C++ file, but it would cause any unit/integration tests to fail. My solution was to use `clang-format`.

I've already used `clang-format` extensively and love it dearly, but I was sad to see that (quite predictably) there is no Rust binding for this library. I was faced with a choice, implement some rudimentary `clang-format` bindings for this project, which would likely require stepping into the realm of the `unsafe` keyword, or just call the executable, piping the input and output to our input and output variables. Because I'm lazy, I chose the latter, sorry.

Whenever a new file is created, it gets passed through `clang-format`, which will change the code style to match the settings stored in `.clang-format` (if the file doesn't exist, it will just use the default LLVM style). This is all handled by the binary file, so I don't have to configure any of it.

## Usage

The usage is really simple, there are 2 possible subcommands, `cppt init` and `cppt new`. The `init` command will create a starter project in an empty directory, including a `meson.build` file (this is my build system of choice, fight me) and a `src/main.cpp` file. The `new` command can then create new script, header and class files inside the `src` directory (or an `include` directory if public headers are your thing). For example:

```sh
cppt new class my_class --namespace my_namespace
```

Will create `src/my_namespace/my_class.{cpp,hpp}`

## Config file

I thought I'd create a config file for all this too, so you could tell `cppt` to not create directories for particular (or any) namespaces, or setting implicit namespaces. I named this `.cppt` and used the YAML format in line with LLVM's config files for `clang-format`, `clangd` and `clang-tidy`. Here's a few settings we can configure:

```yaml
ImplicitNamespace: my::namespace
DontCreateDirForNamespaces:
 - "*" # Disables directory creation
Classes:
  Constructors:
    CreateConstructor: true
    CreateDestructor: true
    CreateCopyConstructor: false
    CreateAssignmentOperator: false
    CreateMoveConstructor: false
    CreateMoveOperator: false
```
